



RFC Series Working Group                                      M. Thomson
Internet-Draft                                                   Mozilla
Updates: 7990 (if approved)                              4 February 2025
Intended status: Informational                                          
Expires: 8 August 2025


                      Changing XML Syntax for RFCs
                draft-thomson-rswg-syntax-change-latest

Abstract

   The authoritative version of RFCs are published in an XML format.
   This format is chosen for its ability to capture semantic details.  A
   policy governing how the RFC XML format changes is described.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://martinthomson.github.io/rfc-syntax-change/draft-thomson-rswg-
   syntax-change.html.  Status information for this document may be
   found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-thomson-rswg-syntax-
   change/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the RFC Series Working
   Group Editorial Stream Working Group mailing list (mailto:rswg@rfc-
   editor.org), which is archived at
   https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/rswg/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/martinthomson/rfc-syntax-change.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 8 August 2025.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Table of Contents

   1.  Rationale
   2.  Syntax Change Policy
     2.1.  Canonical Version
     2.2.  Archival
     2.3.  Publication Formats
   3.  Security Considerations
   4.  IANA Considerations
   5.  References
     5.1.  Normative References
     5.2.  Informative References
   Appendix A.  Advice on Regenerating Publication Formats
   Acknowledgments
   Author's Address

1.  Rationale

   The canonical format for published RFCs is XML [RFC7990].
   Historically, the published version of an RFC has been immutable
   (Section 7.6 of [RFC9280]).

   The RFC XML format [RFC7991] is not able to address use cases that
   were not originally anticipated during its design.  It might also be
   possible to improve the format to better capture meaning.

   Though it might be possible to evolve the format and only use the new
   format for the publication of new RFCs, this would mean that there
   would be no single format across the series.  Tools that seek to
   process RFC XML would need to understand all iterations of the
   format.

2.  Syntax Change Policy

   The RFC Series Working Group (RSWG), constituted by [RFC9280], acts
   as custodian for the RFC XML format.  If the RSWG reaches consensus,
   they can propose a revision to the RFC XML format.

   The RSWG publishes an RFC on the Editorial stream that describes the
   format change.  An updated XML format is used for the publication of
   new RFCs.  Some time might be necessary to implement those changes in
   tools and active documents.

   Existing RFCs can be updated to use the new format.  The RFC that
   describes format changes can also describe how the XML of existing
   RFCs will be updated.

   Updates to the RFC XML format need to ensure that any change to
   existing RFCs preserves -- to the greatest extent possible -- the
   semantics expressed in the original RFC.  That is, the intent is that
   changes only update the XML syntax, they do not alter the semantics
   that are expressed using that syntax.

   The intent behind limiting changes to syntax only is to preserve the
   semantic meaning encoded in the RFC XML document.  While, stream
   procedures formally establish agreement or consensus about a specific
   artifact -- RFC XML in particular -- it is the semantic meaning
   expressed in that document that is important.

   This policy does not require that updates to XML avoid all risk of
   introducing semantic changes to existing RFCs.  For changes that
   might affect many documents, this could be infeasible.  Instead, it
   only requires that the RSWG carefully consider the potential for
   semantic changes, take steps to understand the risk of a semantic
   change -- either deliberate or inadvertent -- and to limit those
   risks.

2.1.  Canonical Version

   When the RFC XML for an RFC is updated, the updated document becomes
   the canonical version of that RFC.

2.2.  Archival

   When the RFC XML of an RFC is updated, the updated document shall be
   archived in addition to the existing version.  Any archive shall
   record the date that a document was created or revised.

   This document does not specify how archives are maintained or how
   archived RFC XML might be located or identified.

2.3.  Publication Formats

   Publication formats are produced from the RFC XML format.  As noted
   in Section 10.2 of [RFC7990], "publication formats may be republished
   as needed".

   As the RFC XML format of a document changes, publication formats can
   change, even if this might not result in observable differences.
   Similarly, as production tools change, publication formats can be
   regenerated to ensure a consistent presentation across the series.

   Publication formats -- or the contexts in which they are displayed --
   can optionally provide additional details of the specific RFC XML
   version that they were generated from, or provide a means to discover
   alternative renderings.

   This document does not stipulate whether publication formats are
   archived.

3.  Security Considerations

   The RSWG are responsible for managing the risk of semantic changes
   that would affect the interpretation of existing and future RFCs.
   Changes to content that has security implications would have
   security-relevant consequences.

4.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

5.  References

5.1.  Normative References

   [RFC7990]  Flanagan, H., "RFC Format Framework", RFC 7990,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7990, December 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7990>.

   [RFC9280]  Saint-Andre, P., Ed., "RFC Editor Model (Version 3)",
              RFC 9280, DOI 10.17487/RFC9280, June 2022,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9280>.

5.2.  Informative References

   [RFC7991]  Hoffman, P., "The "xml2rfc" Version 3 Vocabulary",
              RFC 7991, DOI 10.17487/RFC7991, December 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7991>.

Appendix A.  Advice on Regenerating Publication Formats

   This document does not include specific guidance regarding the
   generation of publication formats from RFC XML source.  Decisions
   about how to maintain publication formats are not a matter governed
   by policy as specified in RFC 9280 [RFC9280].  This section contains
   advice and considerations for the process of regeneration that came
   out of discussions of the policy changes in this document.

   Changes to the RFC XML for existing documents might result in changes
   to the documents rendered from that XML.  At the same time, the tools
   used to generate renderings are under active maintenance.  Having it
   be possible for a fresh rendering to replace existing publication
   formats is a goal supported by the policy changes in this document.

   This creates a risk that a rerendered documents change in unexpected
   ways when they are regenerated.  This risk of unintentional change
   can be managed by implementing validation processes:

   1.  Tools can be continuously checked by producing renderings for
       existing RFCs.  Any change in the rendered document can then be
       compared with previous outputs and validated.  This will ensure
       that changes in tooling are deliberate and understood.

   2.  When a change to XML occurs, rendered documents can be
       regenerated and any change in the rendering can be validated.

   Validation should be aided by automated tooling that is able to
   disregard inconsequential changes in renderings, like changes in
   timestamps and other annotations.  Validation of tooling can be
   continuous, for which automation is essential.

   In both cases, the decision to make renderings available as the
   publication format for an RFC is a decision that can be made on a
   case-by-case basis.  Making fresh renderings available more often
   could mean a greater risk that people seeking to read RFCs will
   obtain a copy that contains accidental errors.  At the same time,
   errors in publication formats might persist if they are not replaced
   as tool quality and reliability improves.

   Old copies of replaced publication formats could be retained to
   provide the ability to isolate changes and understand the evolution
   of documents.

Acknowledgments

   Thanks to Paul Hoffman, Eliot Lear, John Levine, Pete Resnick, and
   Alexis Rossi for constructive discussions about how the evolution of
   the RFC XML format might be managed.

Author's Address

   Martin Thomson
   Mozilla
   Email: mt@lowentropy.net
